source/syllabus.rst, before:

.. _syllabus:

Syllabus
========

Course Description
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Introduction to Linux System Administration and `DevOps`_ methodologies. The
goal of this course is to provide the foundation of knowledge with the tools
and technologies used in managing today's highly scalable and agile systems.

.. _DevOps: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DevOps

Location
~~~~~~~~

MWF: 4-5:00pm, KEC 1001

Instructors
~~~~~~~~~~~

Lance Albertson and Jordan Evans

* email: cs312@osuosl.org
* phone: 541-737-9975

Office Hours
~~~~~~~~~~~~

By appointment only.

Class Mailing List
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Course Content
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux basics:

  * Single system fundamentals
  * OS installation
  * User management

* Development Methodologies:

  * Contribution to the growing DevOps ecosystem
  * Continuous Integration & Deployment

* Configuration Management

  * Historical Context
  * Modern Configuration Management basics

* Monitoring

  * Service Monitoring tools
  * Performance Monitoring tools

* High Availability

  * Load balancing strategies
  * Setting up services to minimize downtime

* Virtualization & Containerization

  * Public and Private cloud technologies
  * Use cases between virtualization and containers

* Distributed Systems & Service Discovery

  * Current and future approaches of distributed and scalable system
    architecture
  * Introspection on the state of distributed systems

Textbook (required)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*System Administration Handbook (4th Edition)* by Evi Nemeth et al

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CS 311, CS 344, or instructor approval

Course Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. **Design** a configuration for multiple machines to achieve a specific task.
#. **Demonstrate** how to install an operating system, partition disk space, add
   and remove network services, connect to a network, and validate system
   performance.
#. **Demonstrate** how to manipulate user accounts across multiple machines
   working in concert, including adding/deleting users, checking disk space
   usage, changing passwords, tracking resource utilization, and tracking login
   frequency.
#. **Demonstrate** how to manipulate system processes, including listing
   processes, killing rogue processes, detecting high use processes, moving
   processing from foreground to background and changing process priority.
#. **Demonstrate** how to start up, reboot, and shut down a collection of
   machines working in concert.
#. **Manipulate** and change user permissions on files and directories for use
   with shared groups of collaborators.
#. **Demonstrate** package management and maintenance across multiple systems.
#. **Create** programs that automate system administration tasks.
#. **Participate** effectively in a team environment.

Attendance Policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**There are no make-up quizzes or exams unless you arrange with me ahead of time
with a valid reason.**

**In general:** Students who do not attend lectures tend to do very poorly in
this class (C or lower).

Grading
~~~~~~~

* 1 midterm (40 pts ) -- *20% of grade*
* 1 final (40 pts) -- *20% of grade*
* 6 Assignments (6 x 20 pts) -- *60% of grade*

=========== =====
Points      Grade
=========== =====
**200-180** **A**
179-175     A-
174-170     B+
**169-160** *B*
159-155*    B-
154-150     C+
**149-140** **C**
139-135     C-
134-130     D+
**129-120** **D**
**119-0**   **F**
=========== =====

Academic Dishonesty
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Policies regarding academic honesty can be found `here`_ and compliance is
expected for this course.

.. _here: http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/pages/rules/oars_500/oar_576/576_015.html

Students with Disabilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Accommodations are collaborative efforts between students, faculty and Services
for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Students with accommodations approved
through SSD are responsible for contacting the faculty member in charge of the
course prior to or during the first week of the term to discuss accommodations.
Students who believe they are eligible for accommodations but who have not yet
obtained approval through SSD should contact SSD immediately at 737-4098.

Commit message:

Include late homework policy to syllabus

source/syllabus.rst, after:

.. _syllabus:

Syllabus
========

Course Description
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Introduction to Linux System Administration and `DevOps`_ methodologies. The
goal of this course is to provide the foundation of knowledge with the tools
and technologies used in managing today's highly scalable and agile systems.

.. _DevOps: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DevOps

Location
~~~~~~~~

MWF: 4-5:00pm, KEC 1001

Instructors
~~~~~~~~~~~

Lance Albertson and Jordan Evans

* email: cs312@osuosl.org
* phone: 541-737-9975

Office Hours
~~~~~~~~~~~~

By appointment only.

Class Mailing List
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Course Content
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux basics:

  * Single system fundamentals
  * OS installation
  * User management

* Development Methodologies:

  * Contribution to the growing DevOps ecosystem
  * Continuous Integration & Deployment

* Configuration Management

  * Historical Context
  * Modern Configuration Management basics

* Monitoring

  * Service Monitoring tools
  * Performance Monitoring tools

* High Availability

  * Load balancing strategies
  * Setting up services to minimize downtime

* Virtualization & Containerization

  * Public and Private cloud technologies
  * Use cases between virtualization and containers

* Distributed Systems & Service Discovery

  * Current and future approaches of distributed and scalable system
    architecture
  * Introspection on the state of distributed systems

Textbook (required)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*System Administration Handbook (4th Edition)* by Evi Nemeth et al

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CS 311, CS 344, or instructor approval

Course Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. **Design** a configuration for multiple machines to achieve a specific task.
#. **Demonstrate** how to install an operating system, partition disk space, add
   and remove network services, connect to a network, and validate system
   performance.
#. **Demonstrate** how to manipulate user accounts across multiple machines
   working in concert, including adding/deleting users, checking disk space
   usage, changing passwords, tracking resource utilization, and tracking login
   frequency.
#. **Demonstrate** how to manipulate system processes, including listing
   processes, killing rogue processes, detecting high use processes, moving
   processing from foreground to background and changing process priority.
#. **Demonstrate** how to start up, reboot, and shut down a collection of
   machines working in concert.
#. **Manipulate** and change user permissions on files and directories for use
   with shared groups of collaborators.
#. **Demonstrate** package management and maintenance across multiple systems.
#. **Create** programs that automate system administration tasks.
#. **Participate** effectively in a team environment.

Attendance Policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**There are no make-up quizzes or exams unless you arrange with me ahead of time
with a valid reason.**

**In general:** Students who do not attend lectures tend to do very poorly in
this class (C or lower).

Late homework policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Any homework that is turned in past the deadline will incur a -10% dock in grade
per day including weekend days.

Grading
~~~~~~~

* 1 midterm (40 pts ) -- *20% of grade*
* 1 final (40 pts) -- *20% of grade*
* 6 Assignments (6 x 20 pts) -- *60% of grade*

=========== =====
Points      Grade
=========== =====
**200-180** **A**
179-175     A-
174-170     B+
**169-160** *B*
159-155*    B-
154-150     C+
**149-140** **C**
139-135     C-
134-130     D+
**129-120** **D**
**119-0**   **F**
=========== =====

Academic Dishonesty
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Policies regarding academic honesty can be found `here`_ and compliance is
expected for this course.

.. _here: http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/pages/rules/oars_500/oar_576/576_015.html

Students with Disabilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Accommodations are collaborative efforts between students, faculty and Services
for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Students with accommodations approved
through SSD are responsible for contacting the faculty member in charge of the
course prior to or during the first week of the term to discuss accommodations.
Students who believe they are eligible for accommodations but who have not yet
obtained approval through SSD should contact SSD immediately at 737-4098.
